5.7 blog (#1505)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-570.mdx

authors:
  - matt
  - florian
  - ema
  - nate
coverImage: '/src/content/blog/_images/astro-570/blog-post-5-7.webp'
socialImage: '/src/content/blog/_images/astro-570/og-astro-5-7.webp'
lang: 'en'
---

import BlogContentImage from '/src/components/BlogContentImage.astro';
import Note from '~/components/Note.astro';
import Mention from '/src/components/Mention.astro';

**Astro 5.7 has a basketload of treats, including stable Sessions and SVG components and a new Experimental Fonts API.**

🐣 Full of the joys of northern-hemisphere spring, Astro 5.7 is here with goodies galore:

- [**Experimental Fonts API**](#experimental-fonts-api)
- [**Sessions API**](#sessions-api)
- [**SVG Components**](#svg-components)
- [**Config Imports**](#config-imports)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Experimental Fonts API

...

## Sessions API

The Astro Sessions API is now stable and ready for production!

> Sessions let you securely store data tied to a specific user as they navigate between pages on your site. Unlike cookies, sessions are stored on the server, so you can store larger amounts of data without worrying about size limits or security issues. They are useful for storing things like user data, shopping carts, and form state, and they work without any client-side JavaScript:

Reviewer: This is a great paragraph, and I've updated docs with some of this exact wording! 🚀

```astro title="src/components/CartButton.astro" {2}
---
const cart = await Astro.session.get('cart');
export const prerender = false;
---

<a href="/checkout">🛒 {cart?.length ?? 0} items</a>
```

They can be used in Astro components, pages, API endpoints, actions, and middleware. The API is the same for all of them:

```ts title="src/actions/addToCart.ts" {9,10}
import { defineAction } from "astro:actions";
import { z } from "astro:schema";
export const server = {
  addToCart: defineAction({
    input: z.object({
      product: z.string(),
    }),
    async handler({ product }, { session }) {
      const cart = await session.get('cart');
      session.set('cart', [...cart, product]);
    },
  }),
};
```

### Type-safety

Of course, as this is Astro, your sessions can be type-safe too. Define an interface and you will get type-checking and auto-completion for all of your session data:

```ts title="src/env.d.ts"
declare namespace App {
  interface SessionData {
    user: {
      id: string;
      name: string;
    };
    cart: string[];
  }
}
```

### Cookie-less sessions

> The session ID is automatically tracked using a cookie, but you can also use them without cookies by using the `session.load()` method. This is useful for things like APIs, where you might want to use a custom header or params to track the session ID:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The session ID is automatically tracked using a cookie, but you can also refer to sessions without cookies by using the `session.load()` method. This is useful for things like APIs, where you might want to use a custom header or params to track the session ID:
```
refer to sessions?
call sessions?
load sessions?
access a session?

Just trying to avoid a double "use"/"using" here and being a bit more precise. Is there anything here that works?

Alternatively, something like:

> but you can instead use the `session.load()` method to (description of action here: refer to/access/identify...

Author: ```suggestion
The session ID is automatically tracked using a cookie, but you can also use the `session.load()` method to access sessions without cookies . This is useful for things like APIs, where you might want to use a custom header or params to track the session ID:
```

    return new Response('Item is required', { status: 400 });
  }
  session.set('cart', [...cart, data.item]);
  // Return the cart and session ID
  return Response.json({ cart, sessionId: session.sessionId });
}
```

### Storage drivers

Astro sessions use storage drivers to persist the data, and these are either zero-config or require minimal setup for all official Astro adapters. Alternatively you can use any [unstorage](https://unstorage.unjs.io/) driver, which supports dozens of storage backends such as Redis and MongoDB.

- **[Node](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/#sessions)**: zero-config filesystem driver
- **[Netlify](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/netlify/#sessions)**: zero-config Netlify Blobs driver
- **[Cloudflare](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/cloudflare/#sessions)**: minimal-config Workers KV driver
- **[Vercel](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/vercel/#sessions)**: minimal-config Redis/Upstash driver

On any of these platforms you can easily switch out the driver for a different one if you don't want to use the default.

```js title="astro.config.mjs" {5-10}

> import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
> 
> export default defineConfig({
>   // ...
>   session: {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import netlify from '@astrojs/netlify';

export default defineConfig({
  // ...
  adapter: netlify(),
  session: {
```
I think this does a few things:
- reinforces that an adapter is needed (and that `server` output is not!)
- shows an official adapter configured with a non-default storage system
- is a nice nod to Netlify 😄

    driver: 'redis',
    options: {
      url: process.env.REDIS_URL,
    },
  },
});

```

### Upgrading from experimental sessions

If you were using the experimental sessions API, you should remove the experimental flag from your `astro.config.mjs` file:

```js title="astro.config.mjs" del={6}
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  // ...
  experimental: {
    session: false,
  },
});
```
Check out the [sessions guide](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/sessions/) to learn more about how to use them in your Astro project.

## SVG Components

...

## Config Imports

The new virtual module `astro:config` is now stable!

> The virtual module allows to import a subset of the Astro configuration, with type-safety in mind. Two sub-paths are exposed for controlled access to your configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The virtual module allows you to import a subset of the Astro configuration, with type-safety in mind. Two sub-paths are exposed for controlled access to your configuration:
```

- `astro:config/client`: exposes config information that is safe to expose to the client.
- `astro:config/server`: exposes additional information that is safe to expose to the server, such as file/dir paths.

> For example, you can now build your own path utilities without relying on an integrations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you can now build your own path utilities without relying on an integration. Properties like `base` and `trailingSlash` set in your configuration can be imported and used in a `.js` file:
```
It just seemed like a long string of code samples without any indication what is happening, so I'm adding something to break them up.

```js title="astro.config.mjs"

> // astro.config.mjs
> export default defineConfig({
>     base: "store/",
>     trailingSlash: "always"
> })
> ```
> 
> ```js title="src/utils.js"
> // src/utils.js

Reviewer: ``````suggestion
export default defineConfig({
    base: "store/",
    trailingSlash: "always"
})
```

```js title="src/utils.js"
``````
We don't need these anymore, since the `title` prop now creates a frame in Expressive Code with Chris's latest update!

(They were duplicating in the preview
![Screenshot 2025-04-09 11 32 14](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e4a1bcf2-f3db-461c-a1c8-af1cde69b7c4)

import { trailingSlash, base } from 'astro:config/client';

// This method adds a forwards slash to paths, and prepends the `base`
function addForwardSlashAndBase(path) {
    let finalPath;
    if (trailingSlash === 'always') {
      finalPath = path.endsWith('/') ? path : path + '/';
    } else {
      finalPath = path;
    }
    if (base !== "/") {
        return base + finalPath
    }
    return finalPath
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Use this path utility that depends on your configuration settings throughout your project, for example, for more control over page links: 
```
Just an idea for something to guide the reader a bit.

```astro title="src/pages/index.astro"
---

> // src/pages/index.astro

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

import { addForwardSlashAndBase } from "@src/utils.js";

const cartUrl = addForwardSlashAndBase("cart"); // it will return "store/cart/"
---

<a href={cartUrl}>Cart</a>
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

We `config`ured you'd enjoy this new ability to access your settings, with Astro's trademark type safety to help you get it right!
```
OK, doesn't HAVE to be a jokey sentence, but I think it might be nice to close this off with *something* about this being a requested feature, or we hope you enjoy it etc. Especially given it's the last entry, and it finished off with a lot of code samples. A conclusion of some sort would be nice here, I think.

homepageLink:
  title: 'Astro 5.7'
  subtitle: 'Available now!'
publishDate: '2025-04-15'
authors:
  - matt
  - florian
  - ema
  - nate
coverImage: '/src/content/blog/_images/astro-570/blog-post-5-7.webp'
socialImage: '/src/content/blog/_images/astro-570/og-astro-5-7.webp'
lang: 'en'
---

import BlogContentImage from '/src/components/BlogContentImage.astro';
import Note from '~/components/Note.astro';
import Mention from '/src/components/Mention.astro';

**Astro 5.7 has a basketload of treats, including stable Sessions and SVG components and a new Experimental Fonts API.**

🐣 Full of the joys of northern-hemisphere spring, Astro 5.7 is here with goodies galore:

- [**Experimental Fonts API**](#experimental-fonts-api)
- [**Sessions API**](#sessions-api)
- [**SVG Components**](#svg-components)
- [**Config Imports**](#config-imports)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Experimental Fonts API

> Almost every website these days use custom fonts. However, it can be surprisingly complicated to get them right: how many font faces should I include? Why do I get a Flash of Unstyled Text? Should I preload?

Reviewer 2: > how many font faces should I include?

I'm not happy about this one but I feel like fonts are complicated except I can't find examples...

Reviewer: I did a quick web search, and this article came up for "fonts best practices" -- is there something here that feels like something you'd point out that's helpful for justifying that fonts are tricky/have potentially performance effects on your site? https://web.dev/articles/font-best-practices

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can talk about preconnect instead

```suggestion
Almost every website these days use custom fonts. However, it can be surprisingly complicated to get them right: why do I get a Flash of Unstyled Text? Should I add a preload link? What about preconnect links? Etc...
```

> Fortunately, web APIs have greatly improved recently and thanks to amazing initiatives of the Open-Source community (eg. [`unifont`](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/) and [`capsize`](https://github.com/seek-oss/capsize)), it's now easier than ever to use fonts in Astro!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Fonts can have significant performance implications on your site, affecting your visitors' browsing experience and important Core Web Vitals (CWV) metrics. Fortunately, web APIs have greatly improved recently and thanks to amazing initiatives of the open source community (eg. [`unifont`](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/) and [`capsize`](https://github.com/seek-oss/capsize)), we've been able to start working on a great way to use fonts in Astro!
```
I think that's true 😅 Do you want something like that here?

Reviewer 2: Can't wait for some charts drama

> This experimental feature allows you to use fonts from your filesystem and various providers (eg. Google, Fontsource, Bunny...) through a unified API. Keep your site performant thanks to sensible defaults and automatic optimizations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This experimental feature allows you to use fonts from both your filesystem and several built-in supported providers (e.g. Google, Fontsource, Bunny) through a unified API. Keep your site performant thanks to sensible defaults and automatic optimizations including fallback font generation.
```
Is this the right way to say it? I think the sentence could use a nod to fallbacks here.

> To enable this feature, configure an `experimental.fonts` object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable this feature, configure an `experimental.fonts` object with one or more fonts:
```

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
        fonts: [{
            provider: fontProviders.google(),
            name: "Roboto",
            cssVariable: "--font-roboto",
        }]
    }
})
```

Then, add a `<Font />` component and site-wide styling in your `<head>`:

```astro title="src/components/Head.astro"
---
import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
---
<Font cssVariable='--font-roboto' preload />
<style>
body {
    font-family: var(--font-roboto);
}
</style>
```

> There's more to discover! Head to [documentation for this experimental feature](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/fonts/) for more information. We'd also appreciate your feedback. Participate in the development of the feature on the [Fonts RFC](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/pull/1039).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's so much more to discover! Head over to [the experimental Fonts documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/fonts/) for the full API, how to get started, and even how to build your own custom `AstroFontProvider` if we don't yet support your preferred font service.

We'd also appreciate your feedback. Participate in the ongoing development of this feature on the [Fonts RFC](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/pull/1039) and help shape its future.
```
Not doing a full review yet, just massaging the ending a bit! Something like this maybe?

lang: 'en'
---

import BlogContentImage from '/src/components/BlogContentImage.astro';
import Note from '~/components/Note.astro';
import Mention from '/src/components/Mention.astro';

**Astro 5.7 has a basketload of treats, including stable Sessions and SVG components and a new Experimental Fonts API.**

🐣 Full of the joys of northern-hemisphere spring, Astro 5.7 is here with goodies galore:

- [**Experimental Fonts API**](#experimental-fonts-api)
- [**Sessions API**](#sessions-api)
- [**SVG Components**](#svg-components)
- [**Config Imports**](#config-imports)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Experimental Fonts API

Almost every website these days uses custom fonts. However, it can be surprisingly complicated to get them right: Why do I get a Flash of Unstyled Text? Should I add a preload link? What about preconnect links? Do I self-host or rely on a third-party provider?

>  Fonts can have significant performance implications on your site, affecting your visitors' browsing experience and important Core Web Vitals (CWV) metrics. Fortunately, web APIs have greatly improved recently and thanks to amazing initiatives of the open source community (eg. [`unifont`](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/) and [`capsize`](https://github.com/seek-oss/capsize)), we've been able to start working on a great way to use fonts in Astro!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fonts can have significant performance implications on your site, affecting your visitors' browsing experience and important Core Web Vitals (CWV) metrics. Fortunately, web APIs have greatly improved recently and thanks to amazing initiatives of the open source community (eg. [`unifont`](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/) and [`capsize`](https://github.com/seek-oss/capsize)), we've been able to start working on a great way to use fonts in Astro!
```

- [**Sessions API**](#sessions-api)
- [**SVG Components**](#svg-components)
- [**Config Imports**](#config-imports)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Experimental Fonts API

Almost every website these days uses custom fonts. However, it can be surprisingly complicated to get them right: Why do I get a Flash of Unstyled Text? Should I add a preload link? What about preconnect links? Do I self-host or rely on a third-party provider?

Fonts can have significant performance implications on your site, affecting your visitors' browsing experience and important Core Web Vitals (CWV) metrics. Fortunately, web APIs have greatly improved recently and thanks to amazing initiatives of the open source community (eg. [`unifont`](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/) and [`capsize`](https://github.com/seek-oss/capsize)), we've been able to start working on a great way to use fonts in Astro!

> This experimental feature allows you to use fonts from both your filesystem and several built-in supported providers (e.g. Google, Fontsource, Bunny) through a unified API. Keep your site performant thanks to sensible defaults and automatic optimizations including fallback font generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This experimental feature allows you to use fonts from both your file system and several built-in supported providers (e.g. Google, Fontsource, Bunny) through a unified API. Keep your site performant thanks to sensible defaults and automatic optimizations including fallback font generation.
```

- **[Cloudflare](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/cloudflare/#sessions)**: minimal-config Workers KV driver
- **[Vercel](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/vercel/#sessions)**: minimal-config Redis/Upstash driver

On any of these platforms you can easily switch out the driver for a different one if you don't want to use the default.

```js title="astro.config.mjs" {5-10}
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import netlify from '@astrojs/netlify';

export default defineConfig({
  // ...
  adapter: netlify(),
  session: {
    driver: 'redis',
    options: {
      url: process.env.REDIS_URL,
    },
  },
});

```

### Upgrading from experimental sessions

If you were using the experimental sessions API, you should remove the experimental flag from your `astro.config.mjs` file:

```js title="astro.config.mjs" del={6}
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  // ...
  experimental: {
    session: false,
  },
});
```
Check out the [sessions guide](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/sessions/) to learn more about how to use them in your Astro project.

## SVG Components

> Astro now supports local SVG files as components! Reference the default import of any `.svg` file and use it as you would use any `.astro` component. The content will be inlined directly into your HTML.
> 
> You can pass props such as `width`, `height`, `fill`, `stroke`, and any other attribute accepted by the [native `<svg>` element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/SVG/Element/svg). 

Reviewer: Per my comment above, fine as is!

But, if you want to add an extra "why you should be excited and why we just used an exclamation point" sentence, then I'd probably restructure closer to this, maybe?

```suggestion
Astro now supports local SVG files as components! **[MOAR HYPE like, "This allows you to/avoids... " or "No more struggling with..."]** (incorporating "The content will be inlined directly into your HTML.")

Reference the default import of any `.svg` file and use it as you would use any `.astro` component. You can pass props such as `width`, `height`, `fill`, `stroke`, and any other attribute accepted by the [native `<svg>` element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/SVG/Element/svg). 
```

---
title: 'Astro 5.7'

> description: 'Astro 5.7 has a basketload of treats, including stable Sessions and SVG components and a new Experimental Fonts API.'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: 'Astro 5.7 has a basket load of treats, including stable Sessions and SVG components and a new Experimental Fonts API.'
```

Author: I'm pretty sure it's fine to keep as a compound word

homepageLink:
  title: 'Astro 5.7'
  subtitle: 'Available now!'
publishDate: '2025-04-15'
authors:
  - matt
  - florian
  - ema
  - nate
coverImage: '/src/content/blog/_images/astro-570/blog-post-5-7.webp'
socialImage: '/src/content/blog/_images/astro-570/og-astro-5-7.webp'
lang: 'en'
---

import BlogContentImage from '/src/components/BlogContentImage.astro';
import Note from '~/components/Note.astro';
import Mention from '/src/components/Mention.astro';

> **Astro 5.7 has a basketload of treats, including stable Sessions and SVG components and a new Experimental Fonts API.**

Reviewer 3: nit: these are two words
```suggestion
**Astro 5.7 has a basket load of treats, including stable Sessions and SVG components and a new Experimental Fonts API.**
```

Author: I'm pretty sure it's fine to keep as a compound word

Reviewer: I had way too many tabs open trying to verify one way or the other. Confirmed that *basketload* is one word, so we can use that as our model here and stick to one word.

yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Experimental Fonts API

Almost every website these days uses custom fonts. However, it can be surprisingly complicated to get them right: Why do I get a Flash of Unstyled Text? Should I add a preload link? What about preconnect links? Do I self-host or rely on a third-party provider?

Fonts can have significant performance implications on your site, affecting your visitors' browsing experience and important Core Web Vitals (CWV) metrics. Fortunately, web APIs have greatly improved recently and thanks to amazing initiatives of the open source community (eg. [`unifont`](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/) and [`capsize`](https://github.com/seek-oss/capsize)), we've been able to start working on a great way to use fonts in Astro!

This experimental feature allows you to use fonts from both your file system and several built-in supported providers (e.g. Google, Fontsource, Bunny) through a unified API. Keep your site performant thanks to sensible defaults and automatic optimizations including fallback font generation.

To enable this feature, configure an `experimental.fonts` object with one or more fonts:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"

> import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"
> 
> export default defineConfig({
>     experimental: {
>         fonts: [{
>             provider: fontProviders.google(),
>             name: "Roboto",
>             cssVariable: "--font-roboto",
>         }]
>     }
> })

Reviewer 3: code sample consistency nit
```suggestion
import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
        fonts: [{
            provider: fontProviders.google(),
            name: "Roboto",
            cssVariable: "--font-roboto"
        }]
    }
});
```

```

Then, add a `<Font />` component and site-wide styling in your `<head>`:

> ```astro title="src/components/Head.astro"
> ---
> import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
> ---
> <Font cssVariable='--font-roboto' preload />
> <style>
> body {
>     font-family: var(--font-roboto);
> }
> </style>
> ```

Reviewer 3: code breathing air nit
```suggestion
```astro title="src/components/Head.astro"
---
import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
---

<Font cssVariable='--font-roboto' preload />
<style>
body {
    font-family: var(--font-roboto);
}
</style>
```
```

We'd also appreciate your feedback. Participate in the ongoing development of this feature on the [Fonts RFC](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/pull/1039) and help shape its future.

## Sessions API

The Astro Sessions API is now stable and ready for production!

Sessions let you securely store data tied to a specific user as they navigate between pages on your site. Unlike cookies, sessions are stored on the server, so you can store larger amounts of data without worrying about size limits or security issues. They are useful for storing things like user data, shopping carts, and form state, and they work without any client-side JavaScript:

```astro title="src/components/CartButton.astro" {2}
---
const cart = await Astro.session.get('cart');
export const prerender = false;
---

<a href="/checkout">🛒 {cart?.length ?? 0} items</a>
```

They can be used in Astro components, pages, API endpoints, actions, and middleware. The API is the same for all of them:

> ```ts title="src/actions/addToCart.ts" {9,10}
> import { defineAction } from "astro:actions";
> import { z } from "astro:schema";
> export const server = {
>   addToCart: defineAction({
>     input: z.object({
>       product: z.string(),
>     }),
>     async handler({ product }, { session }) {
>       const cart = await session.get('cart');
>       session.set('cart', [...cart, product]);
>     },
>   }),
> };
> ```

Reviewer 3: Adding some breathing space between imports and code to be consistent with other samples.
````suggestion
```ts title="src/actions/addToCart.ts" {9,10}
import { defineAction } from "astro:actions";
import { z } from "astro:schema";

export const server = {
  addToCart: defineAction({
    input: z.object({
      product: z.string(),
    }),
    async handler({ product }, { session }) {
      const cart = await session.get('cart');
      session.set('cart', [...cart, product]);
    },
  }),
};
```
````

### Type-safety

Of course, as this is Astro, your sessions can be type-safe too. Define an interface and you will get type-checking and auto-completion for all of your session data:

```ts title="src/env.d.ts"
declare namespace App {
  interface SessionData {
    user: {
      id: string;
      name: string;
    };
    cart: string[];
  }
}
```

### Cookie-less sessions

> The session ID is automatically tracked using a cookie, but you can also use the `session.load()` method to access sessions without cookies . This is useful for things like APIs, where you might want to use a custom header or params to track the session ID:

Reviewer 3: whitespace
```suggestion
The session ID is automatically tracked using a cookie, but you can also use the `session.load()` method to access sessions without cookies. This is useful for things like APIs, where you might want to use a custom header or params to track the session ID:
```

```ts title="src/pages/api/cart.ts" "session.load(sessionId)"
export async function POST({ session, request }: APIContext) {
  const sessionId = request.headers.get('x-session-id');

>   // If there is an existing session ID, load it. Otherwise one will be created

Reviewer 3: comma nit
```suggestion
  // If there is an existing session ID, load it. Otherwise, one will be created
```

  if (sessionId) {
    await session.load(sessionId);
  } 

  const cart = await session.get('cart');
  const data = await request.json<{ item: string }>();

  if (!data?.item) {
    return new Response('Item is required', { status: 400 });
  }
  session.set('cart', [...cart, data.item]);
  // Return the cart and session ID
  return Response.json({ cart, sessionId: session.sessionId });
}
```

### Storage drivers

> Astro sessions use storage drivers to persist the data, and these are either zero-config or require minimal setup for all official Astro adapters. Alternatively you can use any [unstorage](https://unstorage.unjs.io/) driver, which supports dozens of storage backends such as Redis and MongoDB.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Astro sessions use storage drivers to persist the data, and these are either zero-config or require minimal setup for all official Astro adapters. Alternatively, you can use any [unstorage](https://unstorage.unjs.io/) driver, which supports dozens of storage backends such as Redis and MongoDB.
```

- **[Node](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/node/#sessions)**: zero-config filesystem driver
- **[Netlify](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/netlify/#sessions)**: zero-config Netlify Blobs driver
- **[Cloudflare](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/cloudflare/#sessions)**: minimal-config Workers KV driver
- **[Vercel](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/vercel/#sessions)**: minimal-config Redis/Upstash driver

> On any of these platforms you can easily switch out the driver for a different one if you don't want to use the default.

Reviewer 3: comma nit
```suggestion
On any of these platforms, you can easily switch out the driver for a different one if you don't want to use the default.
```

```js title="astro.config.mjs" {5-10}
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import netlify from '@astrojs/netlify';

export default defineConfig({
  // ...
  adapter: netlify(),
  session: {
    driver: 'redis',
    options: {
      url: process.env.REDIS_URL,
    },
  },
});

> 

Reviewer 3: unnecessary line
```suggestion
```

```js title="astro.config.mjs" del={6}
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  // ...
  experimental: {
    svg: true,
  },
});
```

Note that [Astro 5.6](/blog/astro-560) introduced [some breaking changes to this flag](/blog/astro-560/#breaking-changes-to-the-experimental-svg-api). Please check that your code is up-to-date with the latest, stable version of this API.

## Config Imports

The new virtual module `astro:config` is now stable!

The virtual module allows you to import a subset of the Astro configuration, with type-safety in mind. Two sub-paths are exposed for controlled access to your configuration:

- `astro:config/client`: exposes config information that is safe to expose to the client.
- `astro:config/server`: exposes additional information that is safe to expose to the server, such as file/dir paths.

For example, you can now build your own path utilities without relying on an integration. Properties like `base` and `trailingSlash` set in your configuration can be imported and used in a `.js` file:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"

> export default defineConfig({
>     base: "store/",
>     trailingSlash: "always"
> })

Reviewer 3: code nit
```suggestion
export default defineConfig({
    base: "store/",
    trailingSlash: "always"
});
```

```

```js title="src/utils.js"
import { trailingSlash, base } from 'astro:config/client';

> // This method adds a forwards slash to paths, and prepends the `base`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
// This method adds a forward slash to paths, and prepends the `base`
```

function addForwardSlashAndBase(path) {
    let finalPath;
    if (trailingSlash === 'always') {
      finalPath = path.endsWith('/') ? path : path + '/';
    } else {
      finalPath = path;
    }
    if (base !== "/") {
        return base + finalPath
    }
    return finalPath
}
```

Use this path utility that depends on your configuration settings throughout your project, for example, for more control over page links: 
```astro title="src/pages/index.astro"
---
import { addForwardSlashAndBase } from "@src/utils.js";

const cartUrl = addForwardSlashAndBase("cart"); // it will return "store/cart/"
---

<a href={cartUrl}>Cart</a>
```

> We `config`ured you'd enjoy this new ability to access your settings, with Astro's trademark type safety to help you get it right!

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the inspiration for a future first-time contributor alert!

## Bug fixes

As always, we've been working hard on fixing issues since the [5.6 release](/blog/astro-560). See [the changelog](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/main/packages/astro/CHANGELOG.md) for all the details.

## Community

The Astro core team is:

<Mention name="ben" />, <Mention name="caleb" />, <Mention name="chris" />, <Mention name="ema" />, <Mention name="erika" />, <Mention name="florian" />, <Mention name="fuzzy" />, <Mention name="hideoo" />, <Mention name="luiz" />, <Mention name="matt" />, <Mention name="matthew" />, <Mention name="nate" />, <Mention name="reuben" />, <Mention name="sarah" />, and <Mention name="yan" />.

> Thanks to all the other contributors who helped make Astro 5.7 possible, including: [Roberto Molina](https://github.com/robertoms99), [Junseong Park](https://github.com/jsparkdev), [ryu](https://github.com/ryuapp), [Martin Trapp](https://github.com/martrapp) and [Michael Stramel](https://github.com/stramel).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to all the other contributors who helped make Astro 5.7 possible, including: [Roberto Molina](https://github.com/robertoms99), [Junseong Park](https://github.com/jsparkdev), [ryu](https://github.com/ryuapp), [Martin Trapp](https://github.com/martrapp),  [Michael Stramel](https://github.com/stramel), [Armand Philippot](https://github.com/ArmandPhilippot), [Nin3](https://github.com/Nin3lee), [viniciusdeliz](https://github.com/viniciusdeliz),
[Juan Diaz](https://github.com/JuanPabloDiaz), [Marcos Corrochano Arroyo](https://github.com/drixswe),
[Paul Valladares](https://github.com/dreyfus92), [Bugo](https://github.com/dragomano),
[liruifengv](https://github.com/liruifengv), [Thomas Bonnet](https://github.com/thomasbnt),
[Ming-jun Lu](https://github.com/mingjunlu), [CHEZ](https://github.com/choonse),
[omoyx](https://github.com/omoyx), [emily-shen](https://github.com/emily-shen),
[Ariel K](https://github.com/anaxite), [Maciek Palmowski](https://github.com/palmiak), [Matthew Justice](https://github.com/justicematthew), [Adam Matthiesen](https://github.com/Adammatthiesen), and [Louis Escher](https://github.com/louisescher).
```
This is our list! 😅 

We could say "contributors to code and docs" so people themselves aren't surprised, but they are all contributors!
